# Data Extraction Tool for Statistical Downscaling Model

The data extraction (DXT) tool for Statistical Downscaling Model (SDM) are a set
of Python command-line scripts that generates reconstructed daily climate
series for a region-of-interest (RoI) based on contents of the given
Change-of-Date (CoD) file and AWAP local observation dataset. 


## Description 
### Scope
The DXT tool focuses on the raw data extraction part without any
post-processing. The following steps describes the logical process for
running the DXT tool: 

1. An user specifies a set of parameters that are required to locate the corresponding
   CoD file:
    * Model (specify one model from a pre-defined list of 22 CMIP5 models)
    * Scenario (specify one scenario from a pre-defined list of 3 scenarios)
    * Region-Type (specify one region-type from a pre-defined list of 10 climate regions)
    * Season (specify one season from a pre-defined list of 4 seasons)
    * Predictand (specify one predictand from a pre-defined list of 3
      predictands)
2. The path to the CoD file is generated based on inputs from the previous
   step and the base directory of CoD files.
3. The reconstructed climate series of a given RoI is generated by picking data
   from the AWAP dataset according to contents of the CoD File.
    * The RoI is optional. If missing, it will be set to the region-type.
      Otherwise it shall be given in the same format of region-type mask files
      (NetCDF files containing array of Zeros and Ones).
4. The output data is saved as a NetCDF file.
    * The NetCDF file is CF-compliant.
    * For RoI that is not of rectangle shape, a minimum enclosing rectangle
      area will be used padding with missing values.

Any data post-processings, e.g. subsetting (date and region), merging,
inflation, tail distribution correction, and visualisation, are **out of scope
of the DXT tool**. In Vistrails's terminology, these post-processing steps are
separate modules.

### Design
For better modularity, **the DXT tool itself will provide two modules for the
Vistrails system**. 

The **first module** takes user inputs of model, scenario, region-type, season
and predictand and outputs the path to the corresponding CoD file (essentially
covers step 1 and 2 in above listing).

The **second module** takes the path to the CoD file and input. It then reads
the specified CoD file, reconstruct the climate data series for a given RoI and
outputs the data as a CF-compliant NetCDF file (essentially covers step 3 and 4
in above listing).

As the output NetCDF file is CF-compliant, it will be possible to use various
existing NetCDF processing tool (e.g. cdo, nco) for subsettings and
aggregations. A few SDM specific post-processings, e.g. inflation, may **not**
be possible to achieve with existing 3rd party tools and hence require dedicate
Python scripts to be developed. **They are by design out of scope of the DXT tool.
However, if time permits, the inflation post-processing will be looked into
further.**


## Python Version and Modules
* Python version 2.7+ 
* numpy 1.8.0+
* scipy 0.14.0+ (needed for most data post-processing modules except the
  simplest ones)

The code is developed on a local machine and its final running environment
should be one of the NCI machines. It can currently run with the Python 2.7.6
installation on raijin.


## Possible Issues
There maybe some memory issue on running the DXT tool as it requires large
memory to extract data for large regions (e.g. nmr, qld). Data post-processings
like inflation could be even more memory taxing. The tool will only guarantee to
work with smaller regions as memory issue is more hardware and operating system
related and cannot be easily solved in the code itself.


## Usage
The functionalities of the tool is packaged as a Python module called `sdm`. An
command line Python script, `sdmrun.py` is developed to interface with the
module. The general form to use`sdmrun.py` is shown as follows:
```Bash
python sdmrun.py SUB-COMMAND [OPTIONS]
```
Type and run `python sdmrun.py -h` shows more help messages. For a specific
sub-command, type and run `python sdmrun.py SUB-COMMAND -h` to show its
specialized help messages.

### Configurations
Some system wide information, e.g. base directory of the CoD files, are required
before the tool can work properly. These information are provided as
configuration file. A sample configuration file is as follows:
```
[dxt]
cod_base_dir=/path/to/the/cod/files
mask_base_dir=/path/to/the/mask/netcdf/files
gridded_base_dir=/path/to/the/awap/daily/dataset
```
The configuration can be specified on command line via the `-c` flag. If
missing, the tool searches for a file called `.sdm.cfg` under user's home
directory.

### Sub-Commands
There are currently three sub-commands and they are described as follows:

* `cod-getpath`
    Returns path to the CoD file according to the given model, scenario,
    region-type, season and predictand, e.g.: 
    ```Bash
    python sdmrun.py cod-getpath -m ACCESS1.0 -c historical -r tas -s 2 -p rain
    ```

* `dxt-gridded`
    Generates the reconstructed climate series using the given CoD filename. The
    output NetCDF must be specified in order to save the data, e.g.:
    ```Bash
    python sdmrun.py /path/to/a/CoD/File out.nc
    ```

* `dxt-gridded2`
    Similar to above sub-command, but takes parameters that generates a 
    file path to the CoD file instead of the CoD filename directly, e.g:
    ```Bash
    python sdmrun.py -m ACCESS1.0 -c historical -r tas -s 2 -p rain out.nc
    ```


## Appendix
### List of Pre-defined Variables
#### Models
* ACCESS1.0
* ACCESS1.3
* BNU-ESM
* CCSM4
* CMCC-CMS
* CNRM-CM5
* CSIRO-Mk3.6.0
* CanESM2
* GFDL-ESM2G
* GFDL-ESM2M
* HadGEM2-CC
* IPSL-CM5A-LR
* IPSL-CM5A-MR
* IPSL-CM5B-LR
* MIROC-ESM-CHEM
* MIROC-ESM
* MIROC5
* MPI-ESM-LR
* MPI-ESM-MR
* MRI-CGCM3
* NorESM1-M
* bcc-csm1-1-m

#### Scenarios
* historical
* rcp45
* rcp85

#### Region-Types
* mec
* nmr
* nul
* nwa
* qld
* sea
* sec
* smd
* swc
* tas

#### Seasons
* DJF
* MAM
* JJA
* SON

#### Predictands
* rain
* tmin
* tmax

